Papa solved the so-called problem of
induction that was the problem of how if
mathematics or logic or pure reason can
be certain of the truth of its
conclusions it can't by the way but on
the Assumption it can then how does
science work to generate truths about
the universe for us after all it can't
be like mathematics where you just begin
with axioms you are absolutely certain
of and derive conclusions that you're
absolutely certain of the whole point of
science is to go out into the world and
investigate what is absolutely true on
this view so it is said surely it's a
process of repeated observation and
presuming the more observations you
repeatedly see the more certain or
closer to true or confident you can
become but the problem is how then can
we be justified in thinking we are close
to truth or closer to truth with these
repeated observations it was the
philosopher David Hume who raised this
so-called problem of induction in the
18th century and philosophers still
bizarrely today worry about it that
worry being
how can we be justified given our
repeated set of observations say that
the sun has always risen in the past
that we can conclude it is true to say
it will therefore rise tomorrow I say
it's bizarre because the problem has
been solved and basically it's not a
problem at all repeated observations is
not what science is about nor ever has
been about proper first best addressed
this and solved it in many places
including for example his first book the
logic of scientific discovery but the
most succinct explanation that I've
found my favorite one is here in this
book objective knowledge it's right
there in chapter one it refutes
inductivism and justificationism it
refutes therefore the modern
incarnations of this kind of inductivist
view of the world which is called
Bayesian epistemology or just
bayesianism that's an old idea rather
like creationism which these days occurs
by the repackaged name intelligent
design or you know Marxism which is now
repackaged to be called Socialism or
even in some moods wokism it's all the
same similar set of misconceptions just
being repackaged and rebranded and so
here we have inductivism being called
bayesianism but the problem with
inductivism or bayesianism is that in
science like elsewhere in fact we are
not actually after justifications that
our predictions will continue off into
the infinite future or that they
probably will what science is about on
Papa's view are testable theories but
not only that
he is keenly interested in explanations
and that word explanation comes up again
and again in his work there's a chapter
in here titled the aim of Science and in
it papa says explicitly on the first
page of that chapter in fact and I'll
quote Papa writes
I suggest that it is the aim of science
to find satisfactory explanations of
whatever strikes us as being in need of
an explanation buy an explanation or a
causal explanation is meant a set of
statements by which one describes the
State of Affairs to be explained while
the others the explanatory statements
form the explanation in the narrower
sense of the word and so he goes on for
an entire chapter and throughout this
book about explanations
Papa was not only about testability in
the fabric of reality David Deutsch
sharpens this up still further and
clarifies what popper has said any crank
with a prophecy about how the world will
end next Tuesday has an experimentally
testable falsifiable Theory but that's
not enough
that is not papyrian despite what
prominent scientists and philosophers
say about papa Papa's philosophy is not
primarily about falsification any more
than Einstein's physics is about the
speed of light yes falsification is an
important element of Papa's philosophy
and the speed of light is a crucial
component of Einstein's relativity
theories but to think that is all and
everything is wrong to think that
knowing the fact that the speed of light
is constant gives you anything like a
deep understanding of special let alone
general relativity is clearly
misconceived so to think falsification
is all and only what papyrian
epistemology reduces to is approximately
the same level of error it doesn't take
this many pages to say scientific
hypotheses should be testable or all of
these other books either
what David explains here in the fabric
of reality is that the entire content of
a scientific theory is in the
explanation not merely the testable
predictions for example and this is from
the fabric of reality a random person
who claims eating one kilogram of grass
Q is your common cold has a testable
Theory but you should not test it no one
should no one will you can reject it on
the basis it is
explanationless there's no explanation
accompanying that prediction eat the one
kilogram of grass and your common cold
will be cured for more on that read the
book or listen to my podcast with Naval
that you can find here hence some of the
additional work that David has done here
unlike other popular science books that
you might see behind me or other popular
books about science or related matters
like religion written by a scientists we
find something different in the
beginning of infinity it seems to me new
discoveries being explained it's not
merely a summary of our existing
knowledge even our existing Cutting Edge
knowledge as exciting as that all might
be but rather it contains some new
contributions to epistemology how
knowledge works as I said to David about
this when we spoke the first time this
seems to crop up actually is in chapter
one The Reach of explanations and there
we get the concept of good explanations
good explanations being actual
explanations that account for what is
out there in the world and how it works
that are hard to vary these hard to vary
explanations now I'm convinced and most
people who hear about it become
convinced over time but I think there's
a lot of people who think well science
isn't it just about testable theories
why isn't testable theories enough so
there was a lot about explanations even
in my first book yes and some some uh
careful readers pointed out
that I never actually explained what an
explanation is
in the fabric of reality in in fact I I
seem to have taken a bit of a cop-out
path by saying just just saying about
explanations that there isn't any closed
list of attributes that an explanation
must have and uh that's because it
seemed to me that and I think it does
seem to many people
that that the difference between an
explanation and a prediction is obvious
but to most people it was quite opaque
so I thought about it and this this is
indeed one of the few things that I will
acknowledge is kind of a a bit of an
innovation in um the beginning of
infinity I thought about what what
exactly makes the difference and I
thought of some examples such as the
explanation of the seasons as opposed to
predicting them and then I I think that
the example that I like best although
again not everyone does is the example
of the The Conjurer yes where where you
go in and you you go in to see this
Conjuring performance and you see some
cups and balls and the country puts the
the ball under the cup and after a while
you begin to predict the the the the cup
where he puts the ball under is not
going to be the one where it ends up
but that doesn't mean you can explain
what's going on in the trick yeah yeah
exactly so you you can predict quite
confidently that the ball isn't there
and there you are it's Vindicated he uh
but that's not what you mean by how is
the trick done what what you what you
mean is what has happened to bring about
the thing you saw
and so you're not asking for an account
of the thing you saw even a perfect
prediction of the thing you saw you're
asking about the thing you didn't see
yes yes and this comes up so often in
all throughout the book really and I
think it's a subtle Point easily missed
and of course the other example that you
use and that you often go to is this
idea of dinosaurs the one thing that you
actually can't observe is indeed the one
thing that you're invoking as actually
existing and causing the phenomena that
you do observe and I think and in all
these cases that unobserved thing is the
thing that you're really interested in
it's it's the only reason you're
interested in any kind of prediction at
all yes and now this concept of then
hard to vary where all the parts of the
explanation have some functional role
and this is really what makes the
explanation a good explanation as
opposed to any arbitrary account that
could be easily varied mythological
accounts and so on magical accounts did
that come to you did you have that in
mind during the fabric of reality
writing it then or did it only come
later in light of people saying you know
can you sharpen up what you mean by
explanation yeah it's the latter I I
like I said while I was writing fabric
of reality I kind of thought that these
were rather foolishly I thought the
these were words that had an
uncontroversial meaning and uh I it
didn't occur to me that that that most
people would not have this meaning in
mind although many people did so in that
sense it wasn't something I invented it
was something that I realized needs to
to be elaborated to be written down more
clearly and and then I started thinking
about well things that are explanations
and things that aren't explanations and
uh like the ancient myths and so on and
and then I thought with the with with
The Conjurer there are certain
circumstances where The Conjurer did it
is the explanation that the person wants
yes you can imagine a person who
believes in Magic and is is sort of
slowly coming out of that state of mind
like like James Randy's Family when in
his story when he was a teenager and
when he first exposed a fake psychic and
and was horrified to find that most of
the people in the audience didn't want
to know the truth right yeah that
happened more than once there was a
famous I don't know if you know the
famous story that he was on Australian
television he did the same to the spoon
Bender Yuri gella on one of our daytime
lunchtime TalkBack television shows and
the audience was very upset with him and
indeed the host was as well and stormed
off the set I did the same thing to
Randy wow right it's about all the stuff
that you're going to prove you go
against the lady like Doris Stokes who
never harmed anybody in her whole life
and you call her a Charlotte and a fake
you know about it yes I do you said that
she was a liar on the radio you called
her a liar no and that woman wouldn't
lie to anybody and I don't know whether
she's right or wrong but she wouldn't
lie to anybody wake up for commercial
break and you can piss off we'll be back
with Diana Trump
so there there you have it I mean that
that anger
would happen I suppose whether or not he
revealed how he did it it was the fact
that he he was revealing that he did do
it
that was the thing that angered them and
that that was the relevant explanation
in context
so it's so that's why I have to say it's
an explanation is hard to vary while
still solving the problem that it
purports to solve yes which might be
different for different people as well
in the same situation
different for different people in the
same situation
this implies that problems are parochial
which means they are in a time and a
place they don't exist forever in all
places and always often the highly
parochial nature of a problem situation
is very specific for a certain
individual what works for you might not
work for me medicine's a great example
of this some treatments work for some
people but not for others even if they
are very similar people with the same
disease but good explanations are not
just about science
science just happens to be a neat and
relatively clean and easy way to speak
about this whole area of epistemology it
is especially when we consider the
physical sciences and physics in
particular when compared to so many
other areas because in science and
physics
it is highly precise and Rich with
actual knowledge and of course we can do
experiments especially crucial
experiments we can more easily compare
competing theories although indeed we
rarely have competing theories so we can
actually notice when there exists a good
explanation and when there does not but
the concept of good hard to vary
explanations reaches into all areas that
we're interested in history art morality
psychology meditation practice business
economics philosophy and of course one's
own personal life it's rather often we
lack good explanations but this is of
course the point we should be seeking
them happily we can because problems are
soluble and we are all of us creative
that is our defining characteristic
after all